CORE COMPETENCY 1: COMMUNICATION
Actively listens and attends to nonverbal cues when responding to the questions, ideas, and concerns of others. Communicates in an influential or persuasive manner, as appropriate. Writes in a clear and concise manner. Orally communicates in a clear and concise manner. Tailors communication (e.g., language, tone, level of specificity) to the audience's level of understanding and to the communication medium.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Models behavior that shows respect for and careful consideration of others' ideas, comments, and questions. Establishes and maintains an open, honest, two-way dialogue by soliciting input from others and building upon diverse opinions. Skillfully provides clear and organized responses to highly complex issues, following up to ensure thorough understanding. Communicates in an influential or persuasive manner, as appropriate. Prepares, oversees, or guides others in preparing effective communications on high visibility, complex, sensitive, or controversial topics. Effectively selects what information to include in communications for different audiences (including media), properly emphasizing the most critical issues and considering ramifications of communications. Writes communications that rarely require revisions.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Accurately reads and assesses high-stakes, complex, technically challenging, controversial, or sensitive situations and responds effectively. Responds in an incisive, persuasive, and timely manner, even when addressing controversial topics or answering difficult questions. Handles the most complex and highest visibility communications effectively. Accurately anticipates the needs of diverse audiences and optimally targets communications to different levels and needs. Uses traditional and creative communication tools to enhance audience understanding and frame issues effectively.
CORE COMPETENCY 2: CUSTOMER SERVICE
Communicates with customers to understand their needs. Works with customers to set expectations and keeps them informed of issues or problems. Provides timely, flexible, and responsive services to customers.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Develops and guides others in developing solid, responsive relationships with diverse and demanding customers. Intervenes in problem situations with customers, resolving even difficult or contentious issues while still maintaining good working relationships. Manages delivery of product or service offerings by subordinate units, and effectively monitors interfaces between units and customers to track progress and
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Directs the development and implementation of long-term product or service strategies that effectively support the agency's strategic direction and surpass customers' expectations. Positions organizational units for optimal customer focus by implementing processes to define and influence customer expectations and to systematically monitor quality, delivery, and customer satisfaction levels; makes adjustments based on these data to improve functioning.
CORE COMPETENCY 3: REPRESENTING THE AGENCY
Represents the agency and its interests in interactions with external parties. Ensures that interactions with and information provided to outside parties reflect positively on the agency. Enhances trust and credibility in the agency and its mission through effective professional interactions with others outside the organization. Deals professionally and tactfully with external parties in difficult, tense, or emergency situations.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Personally presents and advises subordinate supervisors on presenting a professional image of the agency when interacting with others; enhances trust and credibility. Monitors the interactions of subordinate units with others and holds them accountable to ensure the agency is presented in a positive and professional manner and that its interests are effectively represented. Through skillful interactions with others, builds solid relationships, thereby promoting information exchange and cooperation. Calmly and effectively manages crisis situations, making timely decisions that facilitate security, safety, and desirable outcomes. Engages with others in a manner that earns their respect, advancing the goals and objectives of the agency.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Demonstrates exceptional skill in representing the agency and provides expert guidance to others or handles extremely complex, demanding, or sensitive situations with others in a highly effective manner. Manages the most complex, high-stakes, and difficult crises with confidence and decisiveness, maximizing security, safety, and positive outcomes.
CORE COMPETENCY 4: TEAMWORK AND COOPERATION
Makes positive contributions to achieving team goals. Develops and maintains collaborative working relationships with others. Builds effective partnerships that facilitate working across boundaries, groups, or organizations. Respects and values individual differences and diversity by treating everyone fairly and professionally. Works constructively with others to reach mutually acceptable agreements to resolve conflicts.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Builds and maintains a positive team atmosphere by demonstrating and promoting collaboration among work units. Builds collaborative networks of partners and decision makers across boundaries that help the team to achieve its goals. Builds a climate of cooperation and trust by treating everyone fairly and professionally and demonstrating behavior that shows respect for and value of individual differences and diversity. Anticipates and effectively handles highly complex or sensitive disagreements within or between units, and resolves them in a constructive manner. Fosters an environment in which all team members are encouraged to speak openly, freely, and constructively, resulting in the resolution of conflicts.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Is proactive in recognizing when help is needed, seeking opportunities, and providing assistance to help units accomplish their goals. Demonstrates behavior that clearly values individual differences and diversity; provides direct, clear feedback to individuals who behave in a manner inconsistent with an organizational climate that fosters respect for all people. Champions initiatives and minimizes obstacles, thereby easing the path to achieving team goals. Successfully handles and resolves the most complex and difficult conflicts. Balances the needs of different team members or units to achieve highly effective resolutions.
CORE COMPETENCY 5: TECHNICAL PROFICIENCY
Demonstrates and applies relevant knowledge and skills to perform work in accordance with applicable guidelines. Uses appropriate and available technology or tools to perform work activities. Acquires, develops, and maintains relevant and appropriate job skills through training or other opportunities for learning and development. Stays up-to-date on developments related to own work. Demonstrates an understanding of the organization's mission, functions, and systems. Collects relevant information that is needed to identify and address problems or issues. Analyzes and integrates information to identify issues and draw sound conclusions. Identifies and evaluates alternative solutions to problems. Makes sound, wellinformed, and timely decisions or recommendations. Identifies and utilizes innovative or creative methods and solutions to accomplish work, as appropriate. Maintains an awareness of available resources and the process for acquiring resources. Identifies and advocates for resources required to accomplish work activities or projects. Makes effective and efficient use of available resources. Safeguards available resources to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Successfully applies broad technical or supervisory knowledge and skills (including use of technology and tools) to manage a range of highly complex work activities; provides effective and timely guidance to others to help them develop their technical job skills. Effectively seeks and uses feedback on own performance to enhance knowledge and skills that facilitate achieving results. Demonstrates an extensive knowledge and understanding of the applicable organizations mission, functions, values, relevant policies/procedures (to include, as appropriate, responsibilities toward the protection of classified national security information), and internal controls and how these affect the larger organization and its relationship with external entities; carries out and directs highlevel work in accordance with these. Demonstrates expert knowledge of and provides guidance to others on available resources and processes to acquire them; identifies and negotiates successfully for the resources needed to meet program objectives. Effectively manages and oversees resource expenditures for units or programs, making adjustments as needed to increase efficiency. Effectively oversees efforts to define and collect information to address difficult or complex issues. Assimilates and integrates complex information across multiple areas, evaluating its significance, usefulness, and impact on work unit objectives. Draws sound conclusions and advises on actions to be taken using a broad perspective; anticipates, generates solutions for, and efficiently solves unusual or complex problems. Makes sound and timely decisions; considers alternative courses of action and chooses an effective option that takes into consideration future risks and opportunities.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Uses depth or breadth of expertise to manage the most complex and difficult assignments at this level. Seeks out technological enhancements and other tools to improve work. Continually broadens and enhances expertise, resulting in performing more complex work activities and making significant contributions to achieve important organizational goals and objectives. Advises others on the use of creative and resourceful approaches to managing resources resulting in the unit(s) being able to maximize achievement of outcomes. Effectively anticipates changing workload requirements well in advance and successfully advocates for needed resources. Effectively handles resource requirements for fluid and difficult programs, consistently monitoring and regularly redirecting resources to maximize results across initiatives. Expeditiously assimilates extremely large volumes of information, cutting through peripheral details to zero in on critical issues; helps others do the same. Makes extremely effective decisions by carefully weighing future risks, benefits, and opportunities, even in pressure-filled and high-stakes situations; results of decisions have a positive and wide-reaching impact.
CORE COMPETENCY 6: ASSIGNING, MONITORING, AND EVALUATING WORK
Sets and communicates clear expectations for the work and behavior of others. Coordinates and monitors the work of others. Evaluates the performance of others and follows up to ensure that performance is on track. Recognizes and rewards employee contributions or performance. Addresses employee performance and conduct problems in a timely and appropriate manner. Gives timely and constructive feedback to others. Identifies developmental needs for others and ensures they receive needed developmental or training opportunities.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Establishes and clearly communicates work expectations to members of the unit or team. Effectively coordinates tasks and monitors performance on tasks to meet full objectives. Makes effective work assignments by matching individuals' skills, availability, and experience to work needs in a fair and equitable manner. Empowers staff to perform their work while remaining accessible and providing support and guidance as needed. Effectively monitors and evaluates the performance of team members or units performing complex work in a fair, timely, and equitable manner, ensuring quality, timeliness, and other performance measures are met. Motivates, recognizes, and rewards employees using a variety of methods and addresses performance problems in a fair, equitable, and timely manner. Addresses conduct issues in a timely and constructive manner. Provides timely and constructive developmental feedback to unit members that improves work performance. Uses performance information and solicits employee input to identify development needs; identifies appropriate developmental opportunities where possible, helps individuals receive training or development in a fair and equitable manner. Trains, coaches, or mentors team members.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Anticipates and addresses potential issues and adjusts work activities to improve unit performance. Proactively seeks out and implements effective methods to improve unit's performance. Effectively coordinates tasks and monitors performance on tasks to exceed unit objectives. Develops and sustains a high performance culture by anticipating and defusing potential problems and developing constructive approaches for addressing problems. Proactively addresses difficult and potentially contentious performance and conduct issues in a tactful, honest, and candid manner. Increases motivation by using creative methods of reward and recognition and tailoring them to the individual. Anticipates skill needs that are consistent with organizational trends and changing priorities; identifies creative developmental opportunities for staff to address these needs. Seeks out a wide variety of developmental opportunities for others beyond readily available training and actively encourages them to pursue self-development activities.
CORE COMPETENCY 7: LEADERSHIP
Communicates a vision for work unit, translating broad organizational goals into concrete objectives, plans, priorities and assignments. Maintains an awareness of external factors that affect the organization or specific work assignments. Formulates short- and long-term strategies consistent with organizational goals and internal/external factors. Seeks out and capitalizes on opportunities to help the organization accomplish its mission and objectives and move toward its long-term vision. Infl ences, motivates, and challenges others to maximize their potential. Leads, develops, and manages a high performing, diverse workforce, ensuring employment practices are administered in a fair and equitable manner. Promotes and fosters an inclusive workplace where diversity is valued and leveraged to achieve the vision and mission of the organization.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Effectively and objectively translates and communicates broad goals into unit goals and helps unit members determine how to execute them. Demonstrates an in-depth understanding of external factors that may affect the unit's work and uses this knowledge constructively in establishing goals and priorities. Creates an environment that encourages employees and stakeholders to provide input on possible enhancements or impediments to unit performance. Guides the unit in seeking opportunities to achieve results that accomplish its mission and objectives and move toward its long-term vision. Effectively formulates short- and long-term strategies across organizational units. Displays a work ethic that has a positive impact on the team and inspires effective performance. Builds a high performing, diverse workforce and ensures fairness in leadership practices by recruiting, hiring, promoting, and/or providing developmental opportunities in a fair and equitable manner. Promptly addresses allegations of harassment or discrimination, taking appropriate action. Enables a work environment and organizational culture that values and promotes diversity (of both persons and points of view) and collaboration and where employees are allowed to express their individual views toward improving work products, services, processes, teamwork, and the work environment itself; demonstrates inclusiveness and sensitivity to individual differences. Supports and participates in DHS diversity programs and initiatives; encourages employee participation in diversityrelated activities, events, groups, and organizations.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Effectively formulates long-term strategies across organizational units that take a broad perspective and achieve significant results in support of organizational goals. Effectively uses or oversees the use of feedback mechanisms and performance measures in assessing priorities and advancing unit goals. Documented actions show that equal access to employment programs and opportunities is a priority. Proactively examines the work environment and ensures adherence to EEO principles, statues, regulations, and guidelines; identifies and implements practices that advance DHS EEO goals. Models behavior and clearly recognizes and reinforces high work effort and continual learning, thereby resulting in very high performing work units. Monitors the work environment to identify situations which could potentially lead to allegations of harassment or discrimination and establishes practices to attempt to prevent such allegations.
