CORE COMPETENCY 1: COMMUNICATION
Actively listens and attends to nonverbal cues when responding to the questions, ideas, and concerns of others. Communicates in an influential or persuasive manner, as appropriate. Writes in a clear and concise manner. Orally communicates in a clear and concise manner. Tailors communication (e.g., language, tone, level of specificity) to the audience's level of understanding and to the communication medium.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Applies effective listening skills and appropriately responds when communicating with others. Solicits, shows respect for, and carefully considers others' ideas, comments, and questions within scope of work. Effectively explains or defends viewpoint when necessary. Independently prepares and delivers communications that are clear, concise, and timely. Writes communications that generally require few substantive or editorial revisions.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Accurately reads and assesses more ambiguous situations and responds effectively. Effectively explains or defends viewpoint to audiences who hold opposing views. Independently and effectively tailors communication style (e.g., language, tone, and level of specificity) and customizes communications to the audience.
CORE COMPETENCY 2: CUSTOMER SERVICE
Communicates with customers to understand their needs. Works with customers to set expectations and keeps them informed of issues or problems. Provides timely, flexible, and responsive services to customers.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Reaches out to customers to gather information about their requirements and needs; develops and delivers products or provides services to meet those needs in a timely manner. Discusses expectations with customers, keeps customers informed of problems that could impede progress, and suggests workable solutions. Responds to questions or requests from customers within reasonable time frames. Displays flexibility in responding to changing customer needs.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Independently develops creative and useful ideas that add significant value to products and services. Anticipates customer needs and resolves or avoids potential problems, maximizing customer satisfaction.
CORE COMPETENCY 3: REPRESENTING THE AGENCY
Represents the agency and its interests in interactions with external parties. Ensures that interactions with and information provided to outside parties reflect positively on the agency. Enhances trust and credibility in the agency and its mission through effective professional interactions with others outside the organization. Deals professionally and tactfully with external parties in difficult, tense, or emergency situations.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Presents a professional image of the agency when interacting with others, fostering trust and credibility. In unpredictable situations, stays calm and handles somewhat difficult, tense, or emergency situations with good judgment and professionalism. Takes effective steps to defuse or resolve confrontational situations in a manner that reflects positively on the agency.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Takes action to effectively manage difficult, tense, or emergency situations. Engages with others in a manner that earns their respect and helps to advance the Agency's goals and objectives.
CORE COMPETENCY 4: TEAMWORK AND COOPERATION
Makes positive contributions to achieving team goals. Develops and maintains collaborative working relationships with others. Builds effective partnerships that facilitate working across boundaries, groups, or organizations. Respects and values individual differences and diversity by treating everyone fairly and professionally. Works constructively with others to reach mutually acceptable agreements to resolve conflicts.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Contributes to achieving goals by working collaboratively with others and building effective partnerships across organizational boundaries. Independently offers assistance and provides support to advance goals. Deals with everyone fairly, equitably, and professionally, respecting and valuing individual differences and diversity. Effectively handles disagreements or conflicts, resolving them in a constructive manner. Consults with senior team members or supervisors when appropriate and makes viable recommendations for resolving differences.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Collaborates beyond what is expected resulting in high-impact contributions. Contributes to a climate of trust and skillfully develops productive relationships and networks that advance goals. Anticipates situations with potential for conflict and takes effective steps to minimize escalation. Considers all sides of issues and develops effective compromises or resolutions.
CORE COMPETENCY 5: TECHNICAL PROFICIENCY
Demonstrates and applies relevant knowledge and skills to perform work in accordance with applicable guidelines. Uses appropriate and available technology or tools to perform work activities. Acquires, develops, and maintains relevant and appropriate job skills through training or other opportunities for learning and development. Stays up-to-date on developments related to own work. Demonstrates an understanding of the organization's mission, functions, and systems. Collects relevant information that is needed to identify and address problems or issues. Analyzes and integrates information to identify issues and draw sound conclusions. Identifies and evaluates alternative solutions to problems. Makes sound, well-informed, and timely decisions or recommendations. Identifies and utilizes innovative or creative methods and solutions to accomplish work, as appropriate. Maintains an awareness of available resources and the process for acquiring resources. Identifies and advocates for resources required to accomplish work activities or projects. Makes effective and efficient use of available resources. Safeguards available resources to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Successfully applies knowledge and skills (including use of technology and tools) to independently perform a full range of assignments; seeks guidance as appropriate. Uses formal or informal feedback on own performance to develop job skills that facilitate achieving results. Demonstrates an understanding of the applicable organizations mission, functions, and values, the interrelationships between various units and organizations, and relevant policies/procedures (to include, as appropriate, responsibilities toward the protection of classified national security information); uses this knowledge to carry out a full range of work assignments. Demonstrates working knowledge of the resources available to perform work; identifies and acquires needed resources, and ensures that use of resources is efficient and consistent with the planned project or activity. Effectively gathers complete and relevant information from appropriate sources to address issues or problems. Effectively analyzes information to identify issues, weigh alternatives, and draw logical conclusions; anticipates and resolves a full range of problems or issues. Makes well-reasoned, timely decisions and recommendations affecting own work.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Successfully applies depth and breadth of knowledge to independently perform even highly complex or varied assignments at this level. Accomplishes tasks in a highly efficient and effective manner and makes high impact contributions. Continually broadens and enhances expertise, resulting in performing more complex work activities. Takes initiative to expand knowledge about resources available and makes useful suggestions that increase efficiency. Identifies and uses effective methods to gather information in a highly efficient manner. Regularly and correctly identifies key issues; anticipates and identifies alternative solutions for problems that have a variety of viable solutions. Seeks opportunities to participate in addressing more complex problems.
