CORE COMPETENCY 1: COMMUNICATION
Actively listens and attends to nonverbal cues when responding to the questions, ideas, and concerns of others. Communicates in an influential or persuasive manner, as appropriate. Writes in a clear and concise manner. Orally communicates in a clear and concise manner. Tailors communication (e.g., language, tone, level of specificity) to the audience's level of understanding and to the communication medium.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Listens and appropriately responds to questions and concerns from others. Shows respect for others ideas, comments, and questions. With guidance, prepares and delivers basic communications that may require some revisions.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Accurately reads and assesses situations and responds effectively. Effectively explains viewpoint when necessary. Independently prepares and delivers routine communications that are clear, concise, and timely. Effectively tailors the amount and format of information included in straightforward communications to meet the audiences' needs.
CORE COMPETENCY 2: CUSTOMER SERVICE
Communicates with customers to understand their needs. Works with customers to set expectations and keeps them informed of issues or problems. Provides timely, flexible, and responsive services to customers.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Effectively and appropriately interacts with customers, as directed, to understand their needs and provide them with routine or less complex information, products, or services in a timely manner. With guidance, seeks input to clarify customer needs. Keeps supervisor informed of customer-related issues, as appropriate.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Takes initiative to learn about and engage with customers; provides high-quality service. Recognizes and addresses potential issues or inconsistencies in customer needs. Displays flexibility in responding to changing customer needs.
CORE COMPETENCY 3: REPRESENTING THE AGENCY
Represents the agency and its interests in interactions with external parties. Ensures that interactions with and information provided to outside parties reflect positively on the agency. Enhances trust and credibility in the agency and its mission through effective professional interactions with others outside the organization. Deals professionally and tactfully with external parties in difficult, tense, or emergency situations.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Presents a professional image when interacting with others. In predictable situations where roles are well defined, handles interactions with others in a tactful and calm manner.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Demonstrates a high degree of professionalism and tact when dealing with others in less predictable situations. Takes effective steps to defuse or resolve confrontational situations in a manner that reflects positively on the agency.
CORE COMPETENCY 4: TEAMWORK AND COOPERATION
Makes positive contributions to achieving team goals. Develops and maintains collaborative working relationships with others. Builds effective partnerships that facilitate working across boundaries, groups, or organizations. Respects and values individual differences and diversity by treating everyone fairly and professionally. Works constructively with others to reach mutually acceptable agreements to resolve conflicts.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Contributes to accomplishing goals by working collaboratively with others. Deals with everyone fairly, equitably, and professionally, respecting and valuing individual differences and diversity. Handles minor disagreements or conflicts in a professional manner; consults senior team members or supervisors on more difficult situations.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Collaborates beyond what is expected resulting in high-impact contributions. Contributes to a climate of trust and develops relationships with others that result in more effective team performance. Effectively defuses or avoids conflicts.
CORE COMPETENCY 5: TECHNICAL PROFICIENCY
Demonstrates and applies relevant knowledge and skills to perform work in accordance with applicable guidelines. Uses appropriate and available technology or tools to perform work activities. Acquires, develops, and maintains relevant and appropriate job skills through training or other opportunities for learning and development. Stays up-to-date on developments related to own work. Demonstrates an understanding of the organization's mission, functions, and systems. Collects relevant information that is needed to identify and address problems or issues. Analyzes and integrates information to identify issues and draw sound conclusions. Identifies and evaluates alternative solutions to problems. Makes sound, wellinformed, and timely decisions or recommendations. Identifies and utilizes innovative or creative methods and solutions to accomplish work, as appropriate. Maintains an awareness of available resources and the process for acquiring resources. Identifies and advocates for resources required to accomplish work activities or projects. Makes effective and efficient use of available resources. Safeguards available resources to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Successfully applies basic knowledge and skills (including use of technology and tools) to perform more routine assignments within own occupational specialty, seeking guidance as appropriate. As directed, develops job skills that facilitate achieving results. Demonstrates a basic understanding of the applicable organizations mission, functions, values, and relevant policies/ procedures (to include, as appropriate, responsibilities toward the protection of classified national security information); carries out basic tasks in accordance with these. Is generally familiar with the basic resources needed to perform own work, and uses resources as directed to complete own work in an efficient manner. With guidance, effectively gathers relevant information from routine sources and analyzes information to identify reasonable solutions for issues or problems at this level. Makes well-reasoned decisions in situations involving own specialized work.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Successfully performs advanced tasks with minimal supervision. Continually broadens and enhances job skills, resulting in performing more complex work activities. Takes initiative to discover and make useful suggestions about ways to use resources more efficiently in performing own work. Effectively conducts routine analyses and presents recommendations on issues with minimal supervision; seeks opportunities and takes initiative to assist in addressing more complex problems.
