CORE COMPETENCY 1: COMMUNICATION
Actively listens and attends to nonverbal cues when responding to the questions, ideas, and concerns of others. Communicates in an influential or persuasive manner, as appropriate. Writes in a clear and concise manner. Orally communicates in a clear and concise manner. Tailors communication (e.g., language, tone, level of specificity) to the audience's level of understanding and to the communication medium.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Solicits others' input, viewpoints, or questions; addresses diverse viewpoints and provides clear and organized responses to complex issues, following up to ensure understanding. Shows respect for and carefully considers others' ideas, comments, and questions. Communicates in an influential or persuasive manner, as appropriate. Independently prepares and delivers timely, clear, and concise communications on complex topics. Independently and effectively selects what information to include in communications to best meet the audience's needs. Writes communications that typically require minimal revisions.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Accurately reads and assesses complex organizational or interpersonal situations and responds effectively. Delivers responses in a confident and compelling manner that frequently persuades the audience to a viewpoint. Tailors communication style (e.g., language, tone, and format) and content to different levels of audiences, properly emphasizing the most critical issues and considering ramifications of communications. Writes communications that rarely require revisions.
CORE COMPETENCY 2: CUSTOMER SERVICE
Communicates with customers to understand their needs. Works with customers to set expectations and keeps them informed of issues or problems. Provides timely, flexible, and responsive services to customers.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Maintains regular contact with customers to understand and anticipate their needs; uses customer feedback to enhance products and services. Works with customers to reach mutually acceptable expectations, timelines, and deliverables for large-scale initiatives. Informs customers of changes, issues, or problems that could affect progress and develops effective solutions to address them. Provides flexible, creative, and responsive service to customers, resulting in high levels of customer satisfaction.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Proactively develops innovative and useful approaches for improving or expanding products or services. Takes initiative to anticipate and proactively implement effective solutions to prevent problems, thus avoiding gaps in customer expectations and maximizing customer satisfaction.
CORE COMPETENCY 3: REPRESENTING THE AGENCY
Represents the agency and its interests in interactions with external parties. Ensures that interactions with and information provided to outside parties reflect positively on the agency. Enhances trust and credibility in the agency and its mission through effective professional interactions with others outside the organization. Deals professionally and tactfully with external parties in difficult, tense, or emergency situations.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Represents the agency in a professional manner that educates others, protects its interests, and enhances its image and reputation. Takes action to effectively manage difficult, tense, or emergency situations. Engages with others in a manner that earns their respect and helps to advance the agency's goals and objectives.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Demonstrates exceptional skill in representing the agency; is widely recognized and regularly sought to handle very difficult, sensitive, or visible situations with others. Assumes leadership in handling extremely difficult, tense, or emergency situations; quickly and decisively manages them with a high degree of effectiveness.
CORE COMPETENCY 4: TEAMWORK AND COOPERATION
Makes positive contributions to achieving team goals. Develops and maintains collaborative working relationships with others. Builds effective partnerships that facilitate working across boundaries, groups, or organizations. Respects and values individual differences and diversity by treating everyone fairly and professionally. Works constructively with others to reach mutually acceptable agreements to resolve conflicts.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Contributes to achieving objectives by demonstrating collaborative behaviors with others and building effective partnerships across organizational boundaries. Independently offers assistance and provides support to advance goals. Deals with everyone fairly, equitably, and professionally, respecting and valuing individual differences and diversity. Anticipates situations with potential for conflict and takes effective measures to minimize escalation. Fosters an environment in which all team members are encouraged to speak openly, freely, and constructively, resulting in the effective resolution of conflicts.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Collaborates beyond what is expected resulting in high-impact contributions. Skillfully develops productive relationships and networks that advance goals. Fosters a climate of trust by demonstrating behavior that clearly values individual differences and diversity.
CORE COMPETENCY 5: TECHNICAL PROFICIENCY
Demonstrates and applies relevant knowledge and skills to perform work in accordance with applicable guidelines. Uses appropriate and available technology or tools to perform work activities. Acquires, develops, and maintains relevant and appropriate job skills through training or other opportunities for learning and development. Stays up-to-date on developments related to own work. Demonstrates an understanding of the organization's mission, functions, and systems. Collects relevant information that is needed to identify and address problems or issues. Analyzes and integrates information to identify issues and draw sound conclusions. Identifies and evaluates alternative solutions to problems. Makes sound, wellinformed, and timely decisions or recommendations. Identifies and utilizes innovative or creative methods and solutions to accomplish work, as appropriate. Maintains an awareness of available resources and the process for acquiring resources. Identifies and advocates for resources required to accomplish work activities or projects. Makes effective and efficient use of available resources. Safeguards available resources to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse.
Performance Standards
Achieved Expectations Successfully applies advanced knowledge and skills (including use of technology and tools) to perform a wide range of work activities, such as those that are highly complex, visible, or organization-wide. Effectively seeks and uses formal or informal feedback on own performance to enhance knowledge and skills that facilitate achieving results. Demonstrates a thorough understanding of the applicable organization's mission, functions, values, the interrelationships between various units and organizations, and relevant policies/procedures (to include, as appropriate, responsibilities toward the protection of classified national security information) and how these affect the agency; carries out complex work in accordance with these. Demonstrates in-depth knowledge of the resources available to the work unit, and ensures that resources are distributed and utilized in a highly efficient manner. As required, prepares complex project or activity resource plans and effectively defends resource requirements. Identifies and collects key information that is needed to provide a comprehensive understanding of the situation. Effectively analyzes and integrates complex information to identify important issues and assumptions, assess impact, and draw logical conclusions. Anticipates and identifies alternative solutions for complex problems and makes sound and timely decisions; considers alternative courses of action and chooses an effective option.
Achieved Excellence Additions at the Achieved Excellence level: Uses depth or breadth of expertise to handle the most complex and difficult technical assignments at this level, performing cutting-edge or precedentsetting work. Continually broadens and enhances expertise, resulting in performing the most complex work activities and making contributions that significantly advance key organizational goals and objectives. Devises creative and resourceful approaches to leverage available resources, thereby maximizing achievement of outcomes. Identifies and uses effective methods to optimize efficiency in gathering information. Develops highly effective solutions or decisions for unusual or more complex issues, carefully considering both short- and long-term consequences. Rapidly makes insightful connections between disparate pieces of information and identifies issues with larger implications and significance.
